OS X is the platform, Darwin is the operating system, and XNU is the kernel. Darwin and XNU are open
source software, but the frameworks that make up the OS X platform on top of Darwin, are not.

OS X is built atop Darwin and provides a collection of frameworks and services that implement the 
user interface and main application libraries.

Darwin is an open-source Unix-like operating system first released by Apple Inc. in 2000. It is
composed of code developed by Apple, as well as code derived from NeXTSTEP, BSD, Mach, and other
free software projects. Darwin is not a complete version of OSX, notably lacking the UI layer, and 
all of the Apple applications.

Darwin is based on the FreeBSD UNIX operating system, which differs slightly from GNU linux, so the
syntax of some of the commands is different. Ubuntu uses the Debian package manager to handle 
software installation and management, whereas Darwin has no default package manager.

The kernel of Darwin is XNU.

XNU is the computer operating system kernel developed at Apple Inc. since December 1996 for use in
the macOS operating system and released as free and open-source software as part of the Darwin
operating system. It is also used as the kernel for the iOS, tvOS, and watchOS operating systems.
XNU is an abbreviation of X is Not Unix. Namely, the XNU kernel is the core piece of software that 
provides resource management, hardware abstraction, and scheduling.

The XNU kernel used on OS X includes a few subsystems from (older versions of) FreeBSD, but is
mostly an independent implementation. The kernel, along with other core parts of OS X are
collectively referred to as Darwin. Darwin is a complete operating system based on many of the same
technologies that underlie OS X.

At macOS's core is a POSIX compliant operating system built on top of the XNU kernel, with standard
Unix facilities available from the command line interface. Apple has released this family of
software as a free and open source operating system named Darwin.
