Debian is a Linux distribution composed of free and open-source software, developed by the
community-supported Debian Project. Debian is one of the earliest and oldest operating systems based
on the Linux kernel.

Since its founding, Debian has been developed openly and distributed freely according to the
principles of the GNU Project. The Debian Project is an association of individuals who have
made common cause to create a free operating system. This operating system that we have created is
called Debian.

An operating system is the set of basic programs and utilities that make your computer run. At the
core of an operating system is the kernel. The kernel is the most fundamental program on the
computer and does all the basic housekeeping and lets you start other programs.

Debian systems currently use the Linux kernel or the FreeBSD kernel. Linux is a piece of software
started by Linus Torvalds and supported by thousands of programmers worldwide. FreeBSD is an
operating system including a kernel and other software.

However, work is in progress to provide Debian for other kernels, primarily for the Hurd. The Hurd
is a collection of servers that run on top of a microkernel (such as Mach) to implement different
features. The Hurd is free software produced by the GNU project.

A large part of the basic tools that fill out the operating system come from the GNU project; hence
the names: GNU/Linux, GNU/kFreeBSD, and GNU/Hurd. These tools are also free.

Debian will run on almost all personal computers, including most older models. Each new release of
Debian generally supports a larger number of computer architectures.

Debian includes popular free programs such as LibreOffice,[10] Firefox web browser, Evolution mail,
K3b disc burner, VLC media player, GIMP image editor, and Evince document viewer. Debian is a
popular choice for servers, for example as the operating system component of a LAMP stack.

Ubuntu and Debian are distinct but parallel and closely linked systems. The Ubuntu project seeks to
complement the Debian project. Ubuntu builds on the Debian architecture and infrastructure and
collaborates widely with Debian developers, but there are important differences. Ubuntu has a
distinctive user interface, a separate developer community (though many developers participate in
both projects) and a different release process.

Ubuntu develops and maintains a cross-platform, open-source operating system based on Debian, with
a focus on release quality, enterprise security updates and leadership in key platform capabilities
for integration, security and usability.

Debian GNU/Linux is its own distribution. While Ubuntu is also its own distribution, which simply
builds off the Debian distro.

Mac OS X:


