GNU is a Unix-like operating system. That means it is a collection of many programs: applications,
libraries, developer tools, even games. The development of GNU, started in January 1984, is known
as the GNU Project. Many of the programs in GNU are released under the auspices of the GNU Project;
those we call GNU packages.

The name “GNU” is a recursive acronym for “GNU's Not Unix.” “GNU” is pronounced g'noo, as one
syllable, like saying “grew” but replacing the r with n. The name was chosen because GNU's design is
Unix-like, but differs from Unix by being free software and containing no Unix code.

An operating system consists of various fundamental programs which are needed by your computer so
that it can communicate and receive instructions from users; read and write data to hard disks,
tapes, and printers; control the use of memory; and run other software. The most important part of
an operating system is the kernel. In a GNU/Linux system, Linux is the kernel component. The rest
of the system consists of other programs, many of which were written by or for the GNU Project. Because
the Linux kernel alone does not form a working operating system, we prefer to use the
term “GNU/Linux” to refer to systems that many people casually refer to as “Linux”.

The program in a Unix-like system that allocates machine resources and talks to the hardware is
called the “kernel”. GNU is typically used with a kernel called Linux. This combination is the
GNU/Linux operating system. GNU/Linux is used by millions, though many call it “Linux” by mistake.

The primary and continuing goal of GNU is to offer a Unix-compatible system that would be 100%
free software.

GNU's own kernel, The Hurd, was started in 1990 (before Linux was started). Volunteers continue
developing the Hurd because it is an interesting technical project.

The common shell used to interact with Linux in a terminal is a GNU tool called BASH. To get BASH
onto the computer in the first place it needs to be compiled so you also need a compiler and an
assembler which are also GNU tools.

In fact, GNU is responsible for a whole chain of tools which make it possible to develop programs
and applications for Linux.

So GNU is an operating system and Linux is a kernel. Both of them are based on UNIX. GNU has its
own environment with the GNU OS and the GNU tools. Linux, on the other hand, is just a kernel and
it uses GNU tools and software to interact with the kernel. When you are using bash on your Linux
desktop, you are using GNU’s software which is compiled using GNU’s compilers to use for Linux
kernel.
