A Linux distribution (often abbreviated as distro) is an operating system made from a software
collection, which is based upon the Linux kernel and, often, a package management system. Linux
users usually obtain their operating system by downloading one of the Linux distributions, which
are available for a wide variety of systems.

A typical Linux distribution comprises a Linux kernel, GNU tools and libraries, additional
software, documentation, a window system (the most common being the X Window System), a window
manager, and a desktop environment. Most of the included software is free and open-source
software made available both as compiled binaries and in source code form, allowing
modifications to the original software. Usually, Linux distributions optionally include some
proprietary software that may not be available in source code form, such as binary blobs
required for some device drivers.

Linus Torvalds developed the Linux kernel and distributed its first version, 0.01, in 1991.
Linux was initially distributed as source code only, and later as a pair of downloadable floppy
disk images – one bootable and containing the Linux kernel itself, and the other with a set of
GNU utilities and tools for setting up a file system.

Users were attracted to Linux distributions as alternatives to the DOS and Microsoft Windows
operating systems on IBM PC compatible computers, Mac OS on the Apple Macintosh, and proprietary
versions of Unix. Most early adopters were familiar with Unix from work or school. They embraced
Linux distributions for their low (if any) cost, and availability of the source code for most
or all of the software included.

Originally, the distributions were simply a convenience, offering a free alternative to
proprietary versions of Unix but later they became the usual choice even for Unix or Linux
experts.

Distributions are normally segmented into packages. Each package contains a specific application
or service. The package is typically provided as compiled code, with installation and removal
of packages handled by a package management system (PMS) rather than a simple file archiver. Each
package intended for such a PMS contains meta-information such as a package description, version,
and "dependencies". The package management system can evaluate this meta-information to allow
package searches, to perform an automatic upgrade to a newer version, to check that all
dependencies of a package are fulfilled, and/or to fulfill them automatically.


Most widely used distributions:
  * Debian
    - Non commercial distribution and one the earliest
    - Led to the Ubuntu distro
  * Fedora
    - community distribution sponsered by Red Hat. It aims at being the test bed for the 
      Red Had commercial Linux offerings.
    - Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), is a commercial derivative of Fedora
    - CentOS, free distribution which is built from same sources as RHEL. Attemps to be 100% 
      RHEL compatible
    - Oracle Linux, derivative of RHEL and commercially supported by Oracle
  * Darwin
    - OSX is built on top of it. But uses its own proprietary XNU kernal
    - Created by apple
    - Open source 
    - Built on top of FreeBSD Unix operating system
  * Arch Linux
