The Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) is a family of standards specified by the IEEE
Computer Society for maintaining compatibility between operating systems. POSIX defines the
application programming interface (API), along with command line shells and utility interfaces, for
software compatibility with variants of Unix and other operating systems.

Unix was selected as the basis for a standard system interface partly because it was
"manufacturer-neutral". However, several major versions of Unix existed—so there was a need to
develop a common denominator system. The POSIX specifications for Unix-like operating systems
originally consisted of a single document for the core programming interface, but eventually grew to
19 separate documents.

The standardized user command line and scripting interface were based on the UNIX System V shell.
Many user-level programs, services, and utilities (including awk, echo, ed) were also standardized,
along with required program-level services (including basic I/O: file, terminal, and network). POSIX
also defines a standard threading library API which is supported by most modern operating systems.
In 2008, most parts of POSIX were combined into a single standard (IEEE Std 1003.1-2008, also known
as POSIX.1-2008).

Cygwin provides a largely POSIX-compliant development and run-time environment for Microsoft Windows.


When you write your programs to rely on POSIX standards, you can be pretty sure to be able to port
them easily among a large family of Unix derivatives (including Linux, but not limited to it!); if
and when you use some Linux API that's not standardized as part of Posix, you will have a harder
time if and when you want to port that program or library to other Unix-y systems (e.g., MacOSX) in
the future.


The most important things POSIX 7 defines

  C API
    * Greatly extends ANSI C with things like:
      - more file operations: mkdir, dirname, symlink, readlink, link (hardlinks), poll(), stat,
        sync, nftw()
      - process and threads: fork, execl, wait, pipe, semaphors sem_*, shared memory (shm_*), kill,
        scheduling parameters (nice, sched_*), sleep, mkfifo, setpgid()
      - networking: socket()
      - memory management: mmap, mlock, mprotect, madvise, brk()
      - utilities: regular expressions (reg*)

      Those APIs also determine underlying system concepts on which they depend, e.g. fork requires
      a concept of a process.

      Many Linux system calls exist to implement a specific POSIX C API function and make Linux
      compliant, e.g. sys_write, sys_read, ... Many of those syscalls also have Linux-specific
      extensions however.

      Major Linux desktop implementation: glibc, which in many cases just provides a shallow wrapper
      to system calls.

  CLI utilities
    * E.g.: cd, ls, echo, ...

      Many utilities are direct shell front ends for a corresponding C API function, e.g. mkdir.

      Major Linux desktop implementation: GNU Coreutils for the small ones, separate GNU projects
      for the big ones: sed, grep, awk, ... Some CLI utilities are implemented by Bash as built-ins.

  Shell language
    * E.g., a=b; echo "$a"

      Major Linux desktop implementation: GNU Bash.

  Environment variables
    * E.g.: HOME, PATH.

  Program exit status
    * ANSI C says 0 or EXIT_SUCCESS for success, EXIT_FAILURE for failure, and leaves the rest
      implementation defined.

      POSIX adds:
        - 126: command found but not executable.
        - 127: command not found.
        - 128: terminated by a signal.


  Regular expression

    There are two types: BRE (Basic) and ERE (Extended). Basic is deprecated and only kept to not
    break APIs.

    Those are implemented by C API functions, and used throughout CLI utilities, e.g. grep accepts
    BREs by default, and EREs with -E.

    Major Linux implementation: glibc implements the functions under regex.h which programs like
    grep can use as backend.

  Directory struture
    * E.g.: /dev/null, /tmp

  Filenames
    * / is the path separator
    * NUL cannot be used
    * . is cwd, .. parent
    * portable filenames

  Command line utility API conventions


Many systems follow POSIX closely, but few are actually certified by the Open Group which maintains the standard. Notable certified ones include:
  * OS X (Apple) X stands for both 10 and UNIX. Was the first Apple POSIX system, released circa 2001. See also: Is OSX a POSIX OS?
  * AIX (IBM)
  * HP-UX (HP)
  * Solaris (Oracle)

Most Linux distros are very compliant, but not certified because they don't want to pay the compliance check.




Basically it was a set of measures to ease the pain of development and usage of different flavours
of UNIX by having a (mostly) common API and utilities.
