Virtual memory is a memory management capability of an operating system (OS) that uses
hardware and software to allow a computer to compensate for physical memory shortages
by temporarily transferring data from random access memory (RAM) to disk storage.

Virtual address space is increased using active memory in RAM and inactive memory in
hard disk drives (HDDs) to form contiguous addresses that hold both the application and
its data.

Virtual memory was developed at a time when physical memory -- the installed RAM -- was
expensive. Computers have a finite amount of RAM, so memory can run out, especially when
multiple programs run at the same time. A system using virtual memory uses a section of
the hard drive to emulate RAM. With virtual memory, a system can load larger programs or
multiple programs running at the same time, allowing each one to operate as if it has
infinite memory and without having to purchase more RAM.

While copying virtual memory into physical memory, the OS divides memory into pagefiles
or swap files with a fixed number of addresses. Each page is stored on a disk and when
the page is needed, the OS copies it from the disk to main memory and translates the
virtual addresses into real addresses.


German physicist Fritz-Rudolf Güntsch is credited with developing the concept of virtual
memory in 1956 as part of his doctoral work. In it he described a computer that used
hardware to automatically move blocks of data between primary and secondary memory to
avoid running out of main memory. This formed the basis for paging, a process in which
memory is divided into sections and transferred between RAM and a hard drive to free up
space in RAM. Paging began to show up in commercial computers in the early 1960s.

In 1969, IBM researchers demonstrated that what was by then called a virtual memory overlay
system worked better than the earlier manual systems. Mainframes and minicomputers in the
1970s generally used virtual memory. Virtual memory technology was not included in early
personal computers because developers thought running out of memory would not be a problem
in those machines. That assumption proved incorrect. Intel introduced virtual memory in the
protected mode of the 80286 processor in 1982 and paging support when the 80386 came out in 1985.


A computer's memory management unit (MMU) handles memory operations, including managing virtual
memory. In most computers, the MMU hardware is integrated into the CPU. There are two ways in
which virtual memory is handled: paged and segmented.

Paging divides memory into sections or paging files, usually approximately 4 KB in size. When a
computer uses up its RAM, pages not in use are transferred to the section of the hard drive
designated for virtual memory using a swap file. A swap file is a space set aside on the hard
drive as the virtual memory extensions of the computer's RAM. When the swap file is needed, it's
sent back to RAM using a process called page swapping. This system ensures that computer's OS
and applications don't run out of real memory.

The paging process includes the use of page tables, which translate the virtual addresses that
the OS and applications use into the physical addresses that the MMU uses. Entries in the page
table indicate whether or not the page is in real memory. If the OS or a program doesn't find
what it needs in RAM, then the MMU responds to the missing memory reference with a page fault
exception to get the OS to move the page back to memory when it's needed. Once the page is in
RAM, its virtual address appears in the page table.

Segmentation is also used to manage virtual memory. This approach divides virtual memory into
segments of different lengths. Segments not in use in memory can be moved to virtual memory
space on the hard drive. Segmented information or processes are tracked in a segment table,
which shows if a segment is present in memory, whether it's been modified and what its physical
address is.


Some virtual memory systems combine segmentation and paging. In this case, memory gets divided into
frames or pages. The segments take up multiple pages and the virtual address includes both the
segment number and the page number.

Among the primary benefits of virtual memory is its ability to handle twice as many addresses as main
memory. It uses software to consume more memory by using the HDD as temporary storage while MMUs
translate virtual memory addresses to physical addresses via the CPU. Programs use virtual addresses
to store instructions and data; when a program is executed, the virtual addresses are converted into
actual memory addresses.

The use of virtual memory has its tradeoffs, particularly with speed. It's generally better to have
as much physical memory as possible so programs work directly from RAM or physical memory. The use
of virtual memory slows a computer because data must be mapped between virtual and physical memory,
which requires extra hardware support for address translations.
